

thought that cardiac involvement, especially in the case of bradycardia in SARS-CoV2, involves direct infiltration of the myocardial cells aggravating preexisting conduction disease, resulting in bradyarrhythmia. 6 This is supported by the fact that SARS-CoV2 has been shown to activate angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors, known to be present in sinoatrial nodal cells. 7 Another area of consideration is cardiac damage as a secondary manifestation. A suggested mechanism for cardiac damage is secondary to hypoxemia due to COVID- 19 , which can also aggravate pre-existing arrhythmic conditions. 6 Similarly, cytokine storm, triggered by an imbalance in the response of types 1 and 2 helper cells, has also been linked to cardiac myocyte injury which could indiscriminately aggravate cardiovascular diseases. 8 There has been a large area of focus related to cardiac injury as authors have attempted to establish a correlation with severity of illness, mortality, and long-term prognostication, with little emphasis specifically on bradyarrhythmia. 6 In this systemic scoping review, we aimed to analyze bradyarrhythmia in COVID-19 patients to further characterize this specific cardiac manifestation better to help suggest future studies and ideas for management and therapy.

Study design

This is a systematic scoping review conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR). [9] [10] See Appendix S1 for PRISMA-ScR Checklist of the present study.

Search strategy

We searched MEDLINE and EMBASE for all peer-reviewed articles from inception to October 13th, 2021. No filters for study design and language were used. A manual screening for additional pertinent articles was done using the reference lists of all articles that met the eligibility criteria. The search strategy involved relevant keywords, including "Bradycardia," "AV block," "atrioventricular block," and "COVID-19." The search was conducted by two authors (TN and YN) independently. See Appendix S2 for detailed search terms.

Eligibility criteria

The criteria for the inclusion of articles are the following: 

Data extraction and definition

A standardized data collection form that followed the PRISMA and 

DISCUSSION

In this scoping review, we identified 11 observational studies that included patients with bradyarrhythmia and COVID-19 and 59patients with bradyarrhythmia in COVID-19 from case reports and series. Our results showed that patients with severe or critical COVID-19 may be more likely to have bradyarrhythmia, although there are no observational studies with comparative groups that exclusively looked into bradycardia in COVID-19 to date. Interestingly, more than half of the patients included in our studies had complete AVB requiring either permanent and/or temporary pacemakers, with most of whom had preserved LVEF. Further prospective studies are warranted to assess the need for permanent pacing in these patients.Bradycardia has been reported as a potential rare complication of SARS-CoV infection, although its mechanism is unclear. 53 Several limitations in this study should be noted. First, due to the time constraints, we were unable to contact authors to obtain data not mentioned in the literature, leading to reporting bias. Second, we included only peer-reviewed articles in the systematic review, excluding conference abstracts or preprints, which may cause selection bias.In addition, cases with transient nonsevere bradycardia in COVID-19 patients might not have been reported, which could lead to publication bias. However, this is the first systematic review to investigate the characteristics of bradyarrhythmia in COVID-19 patients. The data presented may be used by frontline clinicians to determine treatment planning for similar patients, including in decisions whether to proceed with a permanent or temporary pacemaker.In conclusion, this systematic review summarizes the current body of evidence and characteristics of bradyarrhythmia in patients with COVID-19. While it remains hypothetical, pathophysiology may be multifactorial with potential direct myocardial injury, iatrogenicity of medications, cytokine-related effects, and/or hypoxia as contributing factors. Further studies are critical to assess the reversibility of bradyarrhythmia in COVID-19 patients as well as to clarify potential therapeutic targets, including HIF or pro-inflammatory cytokines.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

The authors declare no conflicts of interest in association with the present study. 

